functional-programing-with-java-lambda (#4028)
section-engineering-education/engineering-education: content/articles/functional-programming-with-java-lambda/index.md

In Java 8, Lambda was introduced to represent the functional interface of Java. This means that lambdas expression is the expression of functional interface. 

Lambda was introduced to implement behavior code. This code makes it easier through the creation of a function that performs a specific task. Also, this code does not belong to any existing class thus treated as a value.

In this article, the reader will be able to understand Java's functional programming and learn how to assign lambdas to an interface. We will work with lambda expressions using a different number of parameters. 

The reader will be able to convert the object or a class's method to lambdas function with less code. The reader will also understand the importance of using functional programming.

### Prerequisites
To follow along with this tutorial, the reader should have:
- A basic knowledge of Java.
- [Java](https://www.oracle.com/java/technologies/downloads/)  installed.
- Any Java IDE of their choice.
- An understanding of class's and static methods.

> ### Function as a value

Reviewer: Use a descriptive heading, something that explains well what is happening in the heading.

```java

interface Hello {

String sayHello(String greet);

}

public class LambdaAlgorithmTest {

 public static void main(String[] args) {

 Hello hello = (message) -> {

 String str1 = "Welcome ";

 String str2 = str1 + message;

 return str2;

 };

 System.out.println(hello.sayHello("Lambda Tutorial"));

 }

}

```

From the first line of the code above is an interface with the name Hello. Which declare a method called `sayHello`, the method takes one parameter of `greet`. Which is of type string and will return type string. The fourth line creates a new class called `LambdaAlgorithmTest` which contains the main method. The method declares a function `hello` with the type `Hello` interface. And the method function has one parameter of `(message)`with two-variable `str1` and `str2` which both are of type string. The first variable `str1` takes a value `Welcome`. And the second variable `str2` concatenates `str1` and `message` together. And the function return `str2`.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From the first line of the code above is an interface with the name `Hello` which declares a method called `sayHello`.  The method takes one parameter called `greet` which is of the data type `string` and thus return it's return type will be a string.

The fourth line creates a new class called `LambdaAlgorithmTest` which contains the main method. The method declares a function called `hello` with the type `Hello` interface. We also have another method which takes one parameter called `message` with two variables `str1` and `str2` which are both of the type `string`.

 The first variable `str1` takes a value `Welcome`, the second variable `str2` concatenates `str1` and the parameter `message`. The function returns the variable `str2`.

### Working with different Lambda parameters
#### Lambda example that takes no parameters

```java

@FunctionalInterface

interface MyFunctionalInterface {

 //A method with no parameter

 String sayHello();

}

public class Example {

 public static void main(String args[]) {

 // lambda expression

 MyFunctionalInterface msg = () -> "Hello";

 System.out.println(msg.sayHello());

 }

}

```

> From the first line of the above code. `@FunctionalInterface` is an annotation ensuring functional interface does not have more than one abstract method. the second line is an interface with the name ` MyFunctionalInterface`, which declares a method called `sayHello`, the method takes no parameter. the method will return a type of string. the third line creates a new class called `Example` which contains the main method. The method declares a function `msg` with type `MyFunctionalInterface`interface. And the function result will print `Hello`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From the first line of the above code, `@FunctionalInterface` is an annotation that ensures the functional interface does not have more than one abstract method. The second line is an interface with the name `MyFunctionalInterface`, which declares a method called `sayHello`, that takes no parameters. The method will return the type string.

The third line creates a new class called `Example` which contains the main method. The method declares a function `msg` with type `MyFunctionalInterface`interface and the function result will print `Hello`.

> #### Lambda example with a single parameter

Reviewer: Explain briefly what is happening in the code here so readers can follow.

```java

@FunctionalInterface

interface MyFunctionalInterface {

 //A method with a single parameter

 int incrementByFive(int a);

}

public class LambdaSingleParam {

 public static void main(String args[]) {

 // lambda expression with single parameter num

 MyFunctionalInterface f = (num) -> num+5;

 System.out.println(f.incrementByFive(22));

 }

}

```

> #### Lambda example with many parameters

Reviewer: Here as well, explain what is happening in the code so readers can follow.

```java

interface StringConcat {

 String strConcat(String a, String b);

}

public class LambdaMultipleParameter {

 public static void main(String args[]) {

 // lambda expression with many arguments

 StringConcat s = (str1, str2) -> str1 + str2;

 System.out.println("Result: "+ s.sconcat("Hello ", "World"));

 }

}

```

### Lambda stream pipeline

> Streams are objects of classes that implement interface Stream. the stream is either from or one of the specific streams interfaces for preparing collections of int, long or double values. Stream enables you to act on the collection of elements with lambda.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Streams are objects of classes that implement the interface `stream`. The stream is either from one of the specific stream interfaces for preparing collections of `int`, `long` or `double` values. Stream enables you to act on the collection of elements with lambda.
```

> Lambda Stream pipeline is a sequence of processing steps from the data source (from collections). The pipeline performs two main operations which is an intermediate or terminal operation. Which formed a chain method calls.

Reviewer: Check on the two last sentences here and join them so that they can make because they don't.

#### Intermediate and terminal Operation

> An intermediate operation is an activity that plays out a particular task on a stream element and the result of the task form a new stream. Intermediate operations are also called Lazy operations. Which implies that the operation isn't performed until a terminal operation is called.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An intermediate operation is an activity that plays out a particular task on a stream element and the result of the task forms a new stream. Intermediate operations are also called `Lazy` operations which implies that the operation isn't performed until a terminal operation is called.
```

| Operation  |                           Description                           |
| ---------- | :-------------------------------------------------------------: |
| filter     | The filter method allows us to get elements of the stream that  |
|            |                     meet certain conditions.                     |
| ---------- | :-------------------------------------------------------------: |
| distinct   |   The distinct method returns distinct elements of the stream.    |
| ---------- | :-------------------------------------------------------------: |

> | limit      |  The limit method return elements of the stream with the given  |
> |            |                         number or limit.                        |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| The limit method returns elements of the stream with the given  |
|                                number or limit.                                            |
```

| ---------- | :-------------------------------------------------------------: |

> | map        |  The filter method allows us to get elements of the stream that  |

Reviewer: The description here is the same as the one in the filter operation. Check on that.

|            |                     meet certain conditions.                     |
| ---------- | :-------------------------------------------------------------: |
| sorted     |         Returns elements of the stream in a given order.          |
| ---------- | :-------------------------------------------------------------: |

#### The intermediate operation

> A Terminal Operation starts processing of intermediate operation performed on stream and produces the result. Terminal operations are known as eager operations because they carry out the requested task when they are called.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A terminal operation starts processing of intermediate operations performed on a stream and produces a result. Terminal operations are known as `eager` operations because they carry out the requested tasks whenever they are called.
```

| Operation  |                           Description                           |
| ---------- | :-------------------------------------------------------------: |
| forEach    |       Loops through the stream to operate on each element.        |
| ---------- | :-------------------------------------------------------------: |
| count      |     Returns the total number of elements that operations are      |
|            |                          performed on.                           |
| ---------- | :-------------------------------------------------------------: |
| average    | Returns the average of element numerical elements of the stream.  |
|            |                                                                 |
| ---------- | :-------------------------------------------------------------: |

> | min        |       Returns the minimum element of numbers in the stream.      |

Reviewer: Change `Returns the minimum element of numbers in the stream`  to `Returns the minimum number of elements in the stream`. Do the same for the others.

| findAny    |   Returns any elements of the stream based on the intermediate    |
|            |                            operation.                            |
| ---------- | :-------------------------------------------------------------: |
| findFirst  |     Returns the first element of the streams that match the      |
|            |                            predicate.                            |
| ---------- | :-------------------------------------------------------------: |
| anyMatch   |            Checks if any stream matches the predicate.            |
| ---------- | :-------------------------------------------------------------: |
| reduce     |     Returns a single value of all the elements in the stream     |
|            |                        using accumulator.                        |
| ---------- | :-------------------------------------------------------------: |
| allMatch   |      Checks if all the elements match a specified predicate.      |
|            |                                                                 |
| ---------- | :-------------------------------------------------------------: |

> #### Example of stream operation

Reviewer: Explain what is happening in the code here.

```java

List String myList = Arrays.asList("a1", "a2", "b1", "c2", "c1");

myList

 .stream()

 .filter(s - s.startsWith("c"))

 .map(String::toUpperCase)

 .sorted()

 .forEach(System.out::println);

```

### The benefits of lambda in Java
- The interface used is directly identified by looking at each function.
- Lambda expressions are readable without interpretation.
- Lambda allows you to write concise code.

> - Lambda Encouragement of functional programming.

Reviewer: This sentences does not make sense kindly explain or change the whole sentence.

- It simplified variable scope.
- It encourages code reusability.
- Lambda makes parallel processing possible.

> 

Reviewer: Explain briefly each of the points in the `benefits of lambda in Java`.

### Conclusion

> In this article, we looked at the concept of functional programming in Java. We also explained how a function can be used as a value. We able to explain how to create a functional program and how to work with different parameters in lambda. Explaining the concept of a stream pipeline by given insight on the intermediate and terminal operation. the article also touches on the benefit of lambda functional programing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this article, we looked at the concept of functional programming in Java. We explained how a function can be used as a value. We also looked at how to create a functional program and how to work with different parameters in lambda. Lastly, we explained the concept of a stream pipeline by giving insight on the intermediate and terminal operations. The article also touches on the benefit of lambda functional programming.
```

> The stream pipeline explain in this article is the introduction part of it, to learn more above stream

### References
[Java version 16 documentation on stream](http://https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/16/docs/api/java.base/java/util/stream/package-summary.html)

[JRebel](https://www.jrebel.com/blog/pros-and-cons-of-lambdas-in-java-8)

[Theserveside blog](https://www.theserverside.com/blog/Coffee-Talk-Java-News-Stories-and-Opinions/Benefits-of-lambda-expressions-in-Java-makes-the-move-to-a-newer-JDK-worthwhile)

[Stackity stream guide](https://stackify.com/streams-guide-java-8/)

[Winterbe](https://winterbe.com/posts/2014/07/31/java8-stream-tutorial-examples/)

> [java i6 documentation on function api](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/16/docs/api/java.base/java/util/function/package-summary.html)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Java i6 documentation on function api](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/16/docs/api/java.base/java/util/function/package-summary.html)
```

title: Functional Programming with Java Lambda
description: In this article, we will look at the concept of Functional programming in Java. we will also explain how a function can be used as a value.
author: popoola-tunde
date: 2021-10-12T00:00:00-10:03
topics: [Languages]
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
images:

  - url: /engineering-education/functional-programming-with-java-lambda/hero.jpg
    alt: Functional Programming with Java Lambda Hero Image
---
Java is an object-oriented-programming language. It recommends encapsulation of all variables and methods of the class. 
<!--more-->
That is, code blocks before Java 8 are done with classes and objects. The process of passing a behaviour to methods takes extra work and load. This is because we are passing a class with another attribute.

In java 8, Lambda was introduced to represent the Functional interface of java. This means that lambdas expression is the expression of functional interface. Lambda was introduced to implement behaviour code. This code makes it easier through the creation of a function that performs a specific task. Also, this code does not belong to any existing class thus treated as a value.

> At the end of the article, the reader will be able to understand java functional programming. assigning lambdas to an interface. working with lambda expression with a different number of parameters. the reader will also be able to convert the object or class method to lambdas function with less code. The reader will also understand the importance of using function programming

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this article, the reader will be able to understand Java functional programming and learn how to assign lambdas to an interface. We will work with lambda expressions using a different number of parameters. The reader will also be able to convert the object or class method to lambdas function with less code. The reader will also understand the importance of using functional programming.
```

### Prerequisites

> The reader should have:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To follow along with this tutorial, the reader should have:
- A basic knowledge of Java.
- [Java](https://www.oracle.com/java/technologies/downloads/)  installed.
- Any Java IDE of their choice.
- An understanding of class's and static methods.

At least a basic knowledge of Java.

Have Java installed on your computer

Have any IDE of your choice.

Understanding class and static methods will also be of great help.

##Function as value

> Let assign value to a variable:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let us assign a value to a variable:
```
